Hello and welcome to a special edition of Geschichten aus der Geschichte. My name is
Richard and today I have a special guest and it's a special guest some of you may actually
know because she's been a special guest with us before. Welcome Dr Emma Southern. Hi it's good
to be back. I can't believe it's been two years since the last time I was here, just time flies.
It really does and the last time you were here we were talking about a book of yours and today
we're going to be talking about a book of yours. But let me just introduce you a bit more because
you are a writer and you also are a podcaster. You do a podcast called History is Sexy. You do it with
Janina Mathieson, is that correct? That is correct. Good and it's a very good podcast. I enjoy
listening to it. I think the last episode I listened to was the one about pirates.
Oh yeah. I think it's been a while but that is the latest one I listened to. It's very interesting.
Yeah I didn't know we knew so much about pirates until I researched that. That's one of the...
and how horrible being a pirate sounds. Well one could imagine you know. Yeah I suppose if you
thought about it for too long. Living life on the sea is generally not that much fun. Yeah the films make it look
much nicer than it seemed to be. Yeah well if you enjoy killing and pillaging. So it looks very nice
to me. So you do this podcast and yes you wrote a book about which we talked two years ago and
that book was Agrippina, Empress Exile Hustle Whore, the British title. I think they had to kind of
tone it down for the US version. They did. They did. And yeah sorry. No I was gonna say but that's
okay. I always assume that somebody would take that out of the title anyway. Oh well it's the one
you're stuck with here and in our podcast as well. The episode was episode 183 and we released
a full version of the interview three days later and it's still an episode where we still get
very good comments about and good feedback so people really like it. Ah that's nice. Anyway today
we are here to not talk about Agrippina but about your new book and your new book is called
A Fatal Thing Happened on the Way to the Forum Murder in Ancient Rome. Yeah. Now the last couple
of years saw a huge surge of podcasts and I think half of those podcasts came. True crime.
Yeah. True crime podcasts. So I think you're really going with the zeitgeist here. Yeah that's
how the book came about to be honest because a lot of I was talking about true crime podcasts
with a friend of mine and you know the appeal of true crime in general and one of the things that
we both find really interesting about kind of murders and serial killers and horrible events
that happen in today's world is the insight that they give us into the cultures that we live in and
the cultures of the recent past of the 20th century and how certain types of murder can
happen in certain contexts and certain types of murder can be allowed to happen and some are
considered to be much worse than other types and how that gives you a really interesting insight
into the culture and the time and I thought oh I bet someone's written a really good book about this
from a Roman context and kind of Roman crime and Roman murder and what it tells us about the Romans
and it turned out that no one had so I decided that I would write it just so that I could research it.
Yeah someone has to do it. So yeah and it turns out that it really does tell us a lot about Roman
culture and how Romans thought about life and death and who is important and who is not important
and when violence is okay and when it's not and how that changes over the centuries and it ended
up being really interesting. I can attest to that. I mean I read it and it's a very interesting book.
You divided it in various subchapters so you have like the first subchapter is on the senate floor
and then you have things like family and marriage or when you kill an emperor so you already did
some division into different types of murders there which I find really interesting because
like on the surface obviously it's about a murder but like you said earlier it really gives you this
insight into so many different things. I mean you mentioned the and I'm talking specifically about
your book now you mentioned the culture but in many of your episodes that you detail in the book
you get insight into the states or into the state or into the the machinations of the powerful
or the not so powerful or those who want to be powerful etc. So I think to me this obviously on
the on the surface it's about murder but really it's about people isn't it? Yeah it is and that's
you know murder at the end of the day is how we morally define one person killing another person
and that is a like a very intimate act between two people that occurs and what drives somebody
to do that and why they do it and then what happens afterwards are all basically about
human desires and it turns out that they're largely the same selfishness and greed and
a desire to get away with something. So what would you say is special about
murder in ancient Rome when you compare it to let's say the plethora of true crime that you
have about the 20th century in our society? The main thing that immediately leaps out to you when
you're looking at it is that when we look at true crime or look at crime in the 20th 21st century
it's always through the frame of civilians and police and it is the responsibility of the police
to solve crimes and prosecute them and there is this whole structure of the state which exists
to enter people's largely domestic private disputes because most murders are over something
personal and to enter those and then turn them into a state matter and be interested in them
and resolve them to the satisfaction of everybody and in the Roman world that just doesn't exist
there is no separate state apparatus with the responsibility to resolve stuff. It is an entirely
self-help society which means if you want to resolve something like a murder then it is up to
you and your extended circle of family and friends to resolve it and if you have access to
the structures of the state so if you have access to the courts or if you have access to
your local governor then you can ask them to make a decision about what should happen but
they're never going to come and send someone to deal with it for you and what that means is that
so much of everyday crime and murder, calling it crime is wrong because what that means is that
for a large proportion of the Roman world for the pretty much the entire republic it's not
technically a crime to kill somebody because it's not something that the state legislates against
it is a personal interpersonal issue that the family deals with and that is dealt with on a
personal private level so it's technically not a crime. It's not exactly encouraged but it's not
something that the state has any interest in whatsoever and it's not until you start getting
structures which center around a single person that they start trying to really erode away that
that privacy of the family and turn it into a more public institution and also start to control
who can commit violence that it becomes a more of a crime but even then there is no state apparatus
which is going to come in and do it and there's nowhere nobody taking notes on who is killing who
it is entirely a matter for you to deal with as an individual and so we only see the crimes that
really really cause an enormous disturbance in the fabric of society crimes which are either
really really scandalous or really really grotesque in some way or that genuinely impress people to
such an extent that someone writes them down or we see them where people have managed to leave a
little mark on mostly on tombstones where people will say this is a tombstone of my daughter who is
murdered and you get to see like that tiny little bit of justice that they got but there is no
overarching sense that that violence and murder is something that the Romani community is
something that the Roman government is involved in and no one seems to think that they should be
either. Do you think that it is somewhat connected to sort of a feeling that people who are not part
of the one percent are somewhat dispensable? Yes it is. It's partly that there's two things that
come together partly it's that everything in Rome is underpinned by slavery from the very beginning
it is underpinned by slavery and people who have been brought in from outside who are mostly have
been captured in war and been stripped of their humanity they are what is called socially dead
they are already dead basically and they are not seen as people and then as the empire grows as
Rome gets richer the whole thing is economically and practically underpinned by just millions of
enslaved people who are ground up by the Roman empire and they are everywhere but they are not
people legally or morally they you cannot harm if you you cannot harm a slave in the same way that
you can hurt a person because they don't have anything attached to them worth hurting you hurt
a slave in the same way that you hurt a table like it just doesn't register on a moral level
that they're particularly people and once you have that where you are you can stand next to a person
for your whole life you can raise them from a child because a lot of people were born in slavery
but see them as property then that automatically means that you have had to find a way to apply
meaning to human life that doesn't it is not related to the fact that they're just a human
like they know that they're people they know that they're human they know they have feelings and
hurt themselves but in order to make it so that it is okay for those people to be killed and beaten
and and enslaved you have to say that therefore life is worth something because it has something
else and what they have is fama which is like your reputation and honor um so your prestige
so like what other people say about you and your function and importance to the wider society and
the more of that you have the more your life is worth so a consul is worth more than an a deal
who is worth more than an equestrian who is worth more than um your random bookseller on the street
um who is always worth more than a slave and you have that and then on the other hand you have the
fact that rome is fundamentally a set of tribes basically like big family units who all work
together and intermarry but are connected by obligation and counter obligation and feud and
that is where most of the dealings of life go on is at that level of of families talking to families
rather than at a political or state level um and for the republican period certainly
up until augustus they nobody wants to mess with that and augustus starts to change it
um by interfering with the family a bit um but it takes a long time for for that structure
that tribal kind of structure to break down into more individual concerns whereby the state can
be involved in an individual's behavior rather than the father or a kind of a group of elder men
being responsible for your behavior what you said about the um the tribes and the families being
sort of the the one thing you basically live for right or yeah let's say the the farmer you have the
and your honor and your family so these are the two things like honor on an individual level and
family on a less individual level so you always want to further the fame of your family and your
own correct yeah so if you get to be a consort then you then get to pass that down to your
children and your grandchildren that they are now the children and grandchildren of a console
and if your great grandfather was a console then you can you know you can haul that family mask out
at any given time um and you get a special favor because you are your great grandfather was a
console and now you have to try and live up to him and it's all that's all interconnected down
the line going back generations forever and that i think is often overlooked when you look at roman
culture that that importance of the the clan and the gens um an individual and how the individual
and how the individual works within that and when it comes to things like murder is a kind of a
closed ranks thing if your son kills somebody then you're not going to want that broadcast to the
world because that is something that you know in famio is also going to follow you down the
generation so you're going to close ranks you're going to try and deal with it on a person to
person family to family level and hope that nobody else finds out too much about it which
uh is interesting when you talk about how how important it is to keep the family intact and to
keep it intact for your children because in your first chapter you mentioned or you mentioned you
you write about uh publius claudius pulcher who basically let himself be adopted by by another
family so he could become a tribune yeah he does he gives up the claudian name like one of the most
ancient and um prestigious patrician names that connects him back god knows how many generations
back to um publius claudius pulcher's uh going about 400 years it's so that he could become a
plebeian so that he could become the tribune of the plebs which gave him veto over the senate
and meant that he could kind of build up his own little cult of personality and it's a really
interesting point because it's one of the first times that in this late republican period somebody
is doing something for themselves not for any great familial glory but just because they want
this immediate personal gain that they can get in this lifetime and they don't care at all about the
repercussions for their family or their repercussions for their hypothetical future
children yeah it's really fascinating because i wasn't aware of the extent of of the family being
sort of this this uh factor of identification and what a huge scandal it must have been to just give
up that name especially one as big as claudius is like a walking scandal to be but everything he does
um and his sister as well who is very close to claudia they are just a walking scandal everything
they do he dresses up as a woman so that he can break into a female only religious right
he's always he just lies openly to people he then starts his own paramilitary he is just he is
he's a nasty piece of work but i mean it's how you described him you you're like um you wouldn't like
him but um you're in awe of of him being this anecdote machine yeah he is an anecdote machine
because everything he does is extraordinary um and he wouldn't if he was a politician and i had to
live under him i would absolutely hate him and i would you know be writing letters to my mp about
him constantly but he's just such a kind of cape swirling obvious villain who doesn't really seem
to care what anybody thinks of him at all and will do anything for the adulation of the kind
of people of rome including giving up being a patrician um and he leads like the period of his
power is a period of just people dying in the streets because they're being beaten so that they
will vote in the right direction um and it's just like hugely bloody and violent and horrendous but
from the uh from the distance of 2000 years you can look back and just be like my god yeah i mean
that's that is what is afforded to us by history you know it is if after a few couple of hundred
years you can really look back and appreciate it's like bad form if you laugh about someone
who died yesterday but if you laugh about someone who died 2000 years ago it's like okay yeah
it's a funny episode there's a line somewhere where it becomes okay to find it funny all right
since you were talking about these um these violent mobs should we dive into the beginning
of your book where you talk about murder on the senate floor and i'd love to talk about
um this first episode you wrote about tiberius graxos because there were um there were riots
in this story as well not with armed gangs as with um with claudius but still there was a quite a bit
of writing going on or brawling going on would you mind just giving a quick rundown of who tiberius
graxos was because from what i got there's not too much to say about him that is as funny or as
interesting apart from the fact that he was involved in this murder which you know was his own
in the end yeah so he is a politician in um the about 130 bce um he is a from a plebeian but
extremely um extremely ancient family um and particularly on his from his mother's side he
the patrician the cornelian they're the um skipios they have conquered carthage and
um done all kinds of things are very important and he is the older of two sons um and he becomes very
interested in land reform um this is why i say that he is one of the more boring members of his
family the rest of his family um are worlds of anecdotes but um he becomes very and genuinely
interested in land reform and land reform is something which has bothered the romans since
pretty much the beginning of the republic um certainly since they started expanding whereby
rich people buy have been buying up italy as they have conquered more and more of italy they have
the rich have bought it up um and they what they are supposed to be doing is giving it to
landless people um and they have often been stealing it from the state stealing it from one
another stealing it from uh things which are supposed to be rented to poor people so that they
can rent a couple of acres of land um the like land barons basically have rented it to themselves
uh in perpetuity um and it's been a problem that's been going on for a good 300 years and has come
up and people have said we need to um take this land when the government needs to basically have
an amnesty take all the land back and then redistribute it um and it has been constantly
unpopular amongst the senate and very very popular amongst the uh the kind of disenfranchised of rome
um and of italy because there's a lot of people throughout italy who've basically had the romans
show up over the past few hundred years steal all their stuff steal all their land and leave them
leave them um with nothing uh so this comes up every time it has ended with somebody being tried
with it being voted down um tiberius brings it up again and he becomes the tribune of the plebs
and the tribune of the plebs is a position which is supposed to uh speak for the speak for the rights
of the plebeians against the patricians maybe trust so people know what we're talking about here
um anyone who's not familiar so you have the plebeians and you have the patricians and
the patricians are the old rich families and the plebeians are somewhat not as rich not as old it's
a basically a a status signifier whereby the patrician families are those who were originally
chosen to be part of romulus's um court so his advice set of advisors uh so they descend from
the very beginning of rome and then other people have been granted patrician status along the way
for specific things but they are they're like the aristocracy the ancient aristocracy
um and they wear like special shoes and they get um like extra colors and special rings and
stuff which denotes their status and there was a big what's called the conflict of the orders
whereby the patricians had everything in terms of power and the plebeians had nothing so there was
a an uprising and the tribune of the plebs was instituted to be the spokesperson for the plebeians
in this like for the senate and they have the right to override the senate and they have all
kinds of special privileges um now tiberius gracus is more interested in land reform than his previous
people uh the previous people who have attempted to do it um and he is willing to use his power to
force it through in a way that previously people haven't and he proposes a bunch of things like
commissions in order to decide learn who owns everybody's all of the land um take it all in
and then divvy it up so that everybody owns pretty much exactly the same amount of land so everybody
gets about 350 acres which is a massive jump for a lot of people but a massive cut for a lot of
others and the senate there is a there's a an economic barrier to being in the senate you have
to have a certain amount of money like a million sesterces um so you have to you literally have to
be amongst the one percent in order to be in the senate that's self-selectingly the richest people
in rome have all of the power and what occurs is a series of votes that tiberius tries to put through
that um continually devolve because the senate and other tribunes keep intervening um so like he will
call a vote and people flood in from italy in order to vote in these um in these things because
basically someone said to them would you like some free land and they're like would you like to come
and vote on whether you can have some free land i think in your book you uh you called it he bust
in people yeah um they you know they were rounding people up to bring them in to vote and on the other
side all of the the richer side of rome is hanging around in their dinner parties a lot of this land
has been in their families for generations um you know they've got it in a dowry they've inherited
it from their grandfather they've bought it legally off of somebody um who inherited it from someone
else and as far as their concern this is land that means something to them that's been in their
family for generations and now tiberius is going to come and take it away so it's very very fraught
um and this is all occurring at a time when rome is richer than it's ever been before
um and where it's starting to absorb absorb territory by osmosis basically people are so
terrified of the romans in the east mostly um that when they die they are handing their
territory over to the romans so that their people won't have to suffer a roman siege or the roman
army entering so they um at this point they get pergamon um and and so tensions are very very high
and roman's very very rich and everybody wants something out of it and there's a few votes which
have to be called off because um they just descend into chaos people won't let the votes go through
and people bring violence in until the final vote occurs it is in fact tiberius is running for
reelection and they he's they've basically managed to put him off for a full year he's now running
for reelection the vote which is happening kind of in the campus marshes is going very badly as it
has been for the entire previous year but it looks like tiberius is going to win um as the votes come
in people vote orally singularly like and they're totting up and it looks like tiberius is going to
win the senate meanwhile is holding an emergency um an emergency meeting in a temple and are
discussing what they're going to do about it because if tiberius gets through if he has another
mandate to do his land redistribution then there's a very distinct possibility that he genuinely is
going to take their land away yeah um and they start suggesting that maybe they just murder him
and that would solve all of their problems before we go on from here because we are reaching sort of
the culmination of that tale already one thing i just like for you to clarify because you do it so
well in the book tiberius grakos he just he didn't just do this out of the kindness of his heart
right i mean there he there was a there was a need for land distribution there is only because
what you have is a whole lot of people who are very disenfranchised and who genuinely have had
everything taken away from them um who are either living on rented land or who are living
like on no land and and the other issue that you have is at this point the roman army
um still technically requires people to be land owners and also promises people land
um when they come out of the army it's a bit of a catch-22 isn't it
you're promised land but you have to have land in order to um even serve the deal is that if you
serve in the army then you will be given some land of your own once you come out so you serve your
like i um i think it's quite short at this time it's 16 years by the time you get to augustus but
it's short definitely shorter than that here but you serve your time and then you can leave you can
have some italian land you can settle down um and you can be secure and there is no land to give
people right now they're giving away land in other places but a lot of roman citizens don't want to
be i don't want to be going off and living in pergamon um so there is very little time to
go out and so there is very much a need for both the people of rome and for the armies of rome to
that the the city has land to give people and also so much of italian land is being taken up
now by pleasure rather than farmland and because it's being owned by a limited number of people
they're using that land primarily for things like wine and for their own pleasure gardens
and so they're using that land rather than using it for food and italy is losing the ability to feed
itself and this is a long time before they get egypt and the bread basket um so there is a
desperate need for them to um to be able to grow stuff as well if they can have a population that
feeds itself then that's a benefit uh to everybody unfortunately you tell that to somebody that you
garden and give it to 25 soldiers so that they can grow some subsistence vegetables and they did not
take it particularly well of course the long-term ramifications did not uh they did not really care
i mean it's um it's interesting because you the way you framed it earlier was that a lot of those
people who owned or had this land uh for some reason or another they had this sense of entitlement
right it was not that they they most of them probably didn't even think there's something
wrong about them occupying that land basically they as far as they were concerned it was land
that had come to them legitimately like um we're well past a period where italy has been conquered
so it's been 250 years odd since um most of this land was taken by the romans and since it has been
entering roman families and so it's been generations worth of this land being passed around
and as far as each individual sitting in the senate is concerned this is land that belongs to
them it belongs to their wife their grandfather gave it to them they bought it legitimately from
rufus down the road uh and so as far as they're concerned it's like like someone's going to come
into your house and take away your xbox and they're they're furious about it it's like it's not just
that they're taking away their their money because land is like the basis of of so much of wealth
um especially within italy italian land is um much like owning property in like new york or london
like it is um of astronomical value and so it's not just taking away their wealth but it's also
taking away something that belongs to them that is theirs that their granddad once used a thousand
slaves to farm and now they use a thousand slave to farm it and so it is very much they do very
much feel like he is trying to snatch something out of their hands like take their family jewels
or steal their firstborn child and i mean that again plays into the whole gotta keep the family
name intact yeah big and whatnot and if you suddenly your wealth is slashed because half or
two thirds or whatnot of your land is taken away then that has an impact on the on the farmer of
your family right yeah you know and it's potentially going to impact people's
right to be in the senate as well if you need a certain amount of money in order to be in there
and the land is capped in that then um and for people who are hanging on the edge if you take
away half their land then potentially you're knocking them out of the senate right so the the
the whole issue was huge for everyone i mean it's it's not like just one new law or something it's
like it would have been a a formative law would have changed the whole political landscape as well
and and change the landscape of the whole of italy literal literal landscape and would be a really
big deal it would change rome it would change italy it would change the lives of thousands of
people it would undermine the wealth inequality that exists in rome whereby a small number of
people have an awful lot and a lot of people have absolutely nothing right and you know and this is
a place where they haven't introduced the corn doll yet but they're about to um
um because they literally have to feed people who are starving to death in the streets because
there's the that's not possible for people to feed themselves really so it's super emotive and
it is a time when we are teetering into violence being a part of roman politics as usual and this
starts in the when elections are going on where everybody goes down and lines up in their centuries
and then walks in to cast their vote and everybody has to go down and spend the whole damn day
hanging out in a field to vote and listen to a load of speeches and that often because when
you've got thousands of people in a hot field and listening to speeches voting on emotive issues
that often turned into shoving and pushing and then that often became quite violent and during
this time as we enter the late republic it starts to become deliberately violent where people are
deliberately provoking like people in the senate are deliberately provoking violence amongst the
voters which is how stuff is kicking on in the initial vote so the votes for the commission
which passes and then votes for various other things that tiberius tries to pass that they
become very violent and that's how the senate is stopping them from passing and sometimes they kick
off by themselves because there's two two tribunes and they can veto one another so his other tribune
quite regularly will step forward and say no don't speak you i beaten and then the people in the crowd
you came all this way to vote will kick off yeah um but this is ways in which um the whole thing
has been leading towards violence becoming an everyday part of republican politics and the
point at which tiberius is at this point for tiberius's election is the point at which it then
takes a step up into the highest echelons and it's not just senators and the elite
provoking violence amongst people who don't matter whose names will never be remembered
it is them sitting in a temple talking about whether the easiest way to deal with this problem
is going to be to kill tiberius and for them to do it and that's and that's new yes so that has
not happened like that before because i mean obviously you know we all have this or not we
all you obviously don't because you're the expert but generally um when people think back to to
roman times and uh they think of these stories you you get this feeling that you know it's it's
always been kind of like that if you didn't like someone you just killed them even if it was like
a big political figure but as with everything it had to start somewhere and um you say that this is
basically the point where it becomes okay to basically to in the higher or upper echelons
to talk about killing a political adversary yeah before this you could like there are ways in which
you can legally have somebody executed um and it's super easy in the early republic and into
the mid republic to say that somebody wants to be a king and then have them executed for it and that
happens a fair amount and they try to do that to tiberius they accuse him of wanting to be a king
which basically means people like him too much yeah um but that doesn't go anywhere much to
everybody's frustration probably because he is very clearly not interested in being a king
he is genuinely and very tediously interested in landfall yeah nobody nobody really believes that
he wants to be king right no exactly it just can't like he's so staid and serious and um i mean he's
he's no caesar i mean the season okay i can believe it or even his brother because his brother
guy comes later his brother guy spends all of his time like flinging his toga off his shoulder and
slapping his thigh and um making ludicrous pronouncements and he has a um he has a musician
who follows him everywhere to play thematic music for him uh which is great well your life soundtrack
you need it i know it's just what everyone's always wanted um but tiberius is like the staid older
brother he's very serious he's always trying to be reasonable like throughout all of this he's
always trying to explain to people why it's good for them um but he um you know why it's good for
rome in general why it's good for the glory of rome that we can do this so it's just unconvincing
that he wants to be king um and so they can't get rid of him that way they can't get him on anything
anything treasonous they can't get him on any of the ways that they would previously have got rid
of somebody so they end up talking about and somehow you know somebody says for the first time
why don't we just kill him and this happens in a senate meeting an official senate meeting in a
religious space and the council says no we can't do that you can't just go around killing people
that's mental um and they argue about the situation the pontifex maximus um is pushing really hard
for the idea so he's like the head priest um of rome he is the idea is that he takes the place
of a king if a king were to exist to do like the religious the religious duties of the king so the
most important religious duties of rome are the pontifex maximus it's technically a kind of
political position because you get elected to it but it's also a very religious position so it is
a bit like the pope um suddenly deciding that he wants to murder somebody okay i mean it's not
unheard of uh the history of it's true history of posts are pretty great but they so they have
they're having this conversation they're going back and forth the council is really against it
um and in order for it to be legal basically they would need the council to say that he was guilty
of something but they are so hyped up and so emotional over the situation and so afraid that
they just stand up and the pontifex maximus stands up and says as the consul is a traitor to the whole
emperor and he won't let the won't protect rome i will and they tear their benches apart and he
shouts let anyone who wants to save the country come with me and the senators march out of the
of the temple and march up to where the election for tiberius is once again in chaos and they
chase him and his friends across the capitoline hill and beat him to death with wood and they
they did that because they weren't allowed to take their swords with them into the senate yeah
so they're not allowed they don't have any swords so they and they're too impatient to wait and they
are absolutely desperate for it to be over immediately as they see them coming it starts
basically a stampede people are trampled to death people are violently beaten with chair legs and
bits of wood and tiberius falls down um at the feet of the statues of the ancient kings and is
just beaten to death by the senate the richest and most austere and the people in charge of running
the whole empire and they do it in a frenzy of pure rage essentially it's not it's not an
assassination of any kind it is a a pure rage fueled like storming and getting rid of him in
the most brutal way they possibly could so the way you you said it just earlier about the uh the
pontifex saying okay we gotta kill him because he's trying to destroy rome etc yeah yeah do you
think they actually believe that uh that i think they probably did destroy the fabric of the empire
not empire uh the fabric of the republic with this reform i think they probably did yeah i think that
they were like so invested in the structure of the the structure of rome as it worked whereby
a lot of people had everything and a lot of people had nothing and that they they also have this very
strong belief that the aristocracy are just better um like they're kind of um very ancient ideally
again fantasy novels that members of the aristocracy their blood is literally better
than everybody else's yeah i mean it's we have that now you know it's yeah i mean i live in the
uk where it's very that's an idea i mean obviously not as prevalent as it was back then but um the
idea is still exists yeah and you see you know i live in as i said in the uk um our government is
currently run by people who are primarily from landed aristocracy of generations past and people
vote for them quite happily because they're extremely passionate there is a general belief
that very people who are landed aristocracy probably just know how to run things better
yeah um and they seem to believe it very strongly too yeah it's a it's kind of kind of a self-fulfilling
prophecy here you know it is nobody else gets to go they wouldn't be in power if they weren't you
know good if they weren't so good at it and evidence be damned um but yeah so they they do
have that belief and you know this is how it's been since romulus and this this another thing
about romans is that they're very into antiquity old things are by their very nature good the older
something is the gooder it is and so if romulus wanted patricians and a senate and if uh this is
how it's always been then you can't change it that would be ridiculous um and changing things is
inherently bad no matter how uh no matter what you are changing they only change things if they
can trick themselves into believing that they're changing it back to how it was so that that is um
that's very ingrained in them as well the just the idea of changing something ancient is is anathema
um so i suspect that they did genuinely believe that they were doing the right thing and the next
day and the days after tiberius's murder when you think they might be maybe wake up in their beds
and think oh my god what did we do they double down quite hard on what they did they defile
tiberius's body and throw it in the river they then exile and execute a bunch of his friends
and just basically try to make it so that land reform is never going to come up again
because this is what is going to happen and they basically convince themselves and write it into
the consequences that they did the right thing they protected the republic he was a traitor and
a threat to the republic and therefore he had to die and what that did was it made it so that as
long as you said oh i'm protecting the republic and possibly if you even believe that you were
protecting the republic killing someone in the political arena could be legitimate you could have
a cast iron defense that said yes i killed him off the bat with no trial by myself with a stick but
he was threatening the republic so that kind of paved the way for the for the next centuries right
or or decades at least yeah until you know right the way down to the that's the reasoning that is
used by brutus and cassius and other brutus when they um kill caesar and that's their reasoning
for not killing antony is well we're protecting the republic and it's the reasoning that cicero
uses when he executes cataline without a trial that he is protecting the republic and everyone
says do you have any got any evidence and he says no you can't have a look at it i did it last night
i've lost it um but um so i definitely that's definitely why i did it would you say that the
the situation um that kind of culminated in the murder of tiberius do you think it would have
come to something similar anyway so that um you know something like like the murder of caesar
would have happened anyway or would you say that without tiberius probably uh the murder of caesar
wouldn't have happened in the way it did i mean obviously that's conjecture because there were
you know a few steps in between and caesar probably wouldn't have existed if things went
differently back then but yeah would you say i suspect it does i think it does pave the way for
the murder of cesar because it is the first time that that like that kind of assassination of
senator on senator violence in such a way and they justify it to themselves and to everyone who is
watching and that then sets you on the path for for what happens to caesar otherwise what you have
is a path of trials and exiles and it was never going to be possible to try or exile caesar
and i suspect that without the legacy of justified political violence that grows in the
late republic caesar if caesar is not assassinated then caesar just makes himself a king
so uh since you mentioned exile and and you mentioned that the next day after tiberius was
killed they had friends of his or family even killed as well would you say that this is was
done so people wouldn't try to take revenge for the murder of tiberius sort of like what people
did when someone was murdered basically they do it so there could be no other no other place for
that populism to coalesce around like there can be nobody else that that can take up his mantle
but there happened to be another one doing it right there was they didn't as they always
overlook someone and they overlooked his brother which is kind of a rookie mistake isn't it i mean
it's his brother yeah uh you think it was obvious but his brother was very young um and it takes a
decade for guys to to enter the political arena and um try to kind of take up his brother's mantle
and he is he's much more uh fiery and is much less reasonable um and he attempt basically
the first sign of dissent uh tries to lead a coup against the senate uh like a military coup
which does not last very long at all because as soon as he has done that he has cast himself
like he literally is an enemy of the republic then there's no backing away from it and so they
just send soldiers in who behead him and everybody he knows uh and they treat it as a violent
attempt to overthrow the republic which is a shame because he could he'd been a bit more reasonable
something different could have happened but he is um he's considerably less patient than his brother
but it is a another incident 10 years later with largely the same people still around um where
again they have to kill somebody in order to and they they chase him down and cut his head off and
then they bring his head back and the person who brought it back gets its weight in gold um but
they you know they hunt him down they behead him they bring it back and it's another time very soon
after where they can say this guy threatened the republic so we killed him we didn't put him on
trial we didn't do anything you know legal around the situation we just we went and dealt with it
so uh tabir is his that his brother is dead end of this story but uh one thing that i'd like to
i'd like to talk about at the end is the sources because you mentioned details about you know the
killing of tabir is like that he falls to the feet of the ancient kings and the way he's bludgeoned
to death etc etc how reliable are these sources that you're taking you know this information from
or can we even talk about reliable in that context it's tough to talk about reliable
um with the romans there but there are two big sources for tiberius and gaius who are a plutarch
they're both writing a long time later um and are actively baffled by uh the republic really
and how roman republic works they are writing in a time when there has not just been emperors but
there's been emperors for 200 years and it is basic and the word caesar means emperor and so
they but it's quite interesting because they you can see where they are trying to honestly
write out what their sources are tell them because they say i don't understand why this happened
um so they when they write about the debate about whether they should kill tiberius while the senate
are all sitting around in the temple apian is really baffled as to why they don't just
make somebody a dictator and then he could do it legally um and why they don't just make why they
don't just make somebody into like a mini emperor basically he's just really baffled and that just
that like you can't just do that in the republic um but so it's apian and plutarch apian um it
writes thing called the civil wars which is uh effectively a long history of the collapse of the
the roman republic through all of the various wars so coming out this one into the social wars with
marius and uh sullar and then into pompi and da da da da da um and plutarch who wrote a series of
biographies called the parallel lives where he took figures from greek history classical greek
history and figures from roman history and kind of tried to match them up so he wrote one of
tiberius gracus which has a lot of the good details in it because he likes a good detail
but they are writing they're writing a long time after and they're writing in a completely
different context and they are genuinely kind of baffled by what is occurring um but they do both
write a really nice narrative um and it matches so they're obviously drawing from the same sources
whatever they're drawing from it's unusual for something to match reasonably well just out of
interests i mean obviously everything here is out of interest but how or where would they get their
sources from i mean are these sources that we just don't know about nowadays because they're lost or
would this be sort of oral tradition or it is lost historians we know the names of quite a lot
of lost historians from various periods that people drew from and they will often say like
you know x says why marius says da da da and um maricius says that but those are sadly lost like
romans really loved writing histories about themselves they enjoyed it a lot particularly
it was a great hobby for senators to sit around and write histories of themselves much in the same
way that it's really popular for historians of uh for british politicians to be historians of the
victorians or you know churchill or whatever like they love to write a history of their own times
and the times that they wish they lived in um but so much of it because it's latin was lost
in the middle ages uh so we know who they were we vaguely know sometimes when they existed
but they're unfortunately lost forever would you i mean um my uh my academic focus was
the early medieval period uh so i'm like on the on the other side of the spectrum because
i have like for my thesis i had two reliable sources basically yeah um yeah i know that
feeling it's somewhat reliable sources and what is it like for someone who does ancient um who
does ancient rome like you do and you have like this huge amount of material to choose from how
how do you do it i tell you it never feels like it's only when you're dealing with this very narrow
period that you have a huge amount of to deal with this and that's why that period is so well known
basically starting here with tiberius through to um the end of the julio claudians is like a really
well known period and that is really really like really well covered and there's multiple sources
for various things some of them are not like tacitus for example who we use for most of the
julio claudians has big chunks missing which is heartbreaking um but um but it's only that
and once you step out of the politics of the of the late republic and early imperial system
and then it's kind of wastelandy oh okay and it's much more like it is for you but it is it's nice
when you have when you get to do something so this is great for me because i don't usually do
write about politics um and i certainly don't write about the politics of the late republic so
i was having so much fun being like i've got five sources for this and i can and they basically
agree with each other this is amazing um but uh so it feels like uh an embarrassment of riches
i don't know how you deal with much one that i always think it's about 20th century historians
where they've got so much like how do you narrow it down all right emma i've taken up a huge chunk
of your time already um thank you so much one thing that um i um just have to mention because
it's been going around my head all through actually reading that book and um and now
talking to you the historian tom holland who blurbed your book as well yeah he he wrote this
book dominion which i'm sure you're familiar with and in an interview he said something interesting
that people are actually when they think of of ancient rome nowadays with you know the senate
and political structures and all this stuff that is kind of like the basis for how we see sort of
you know democracy etc they have this idea of this ideal idea of the romans and that actually
compared to the way we value life nowadays it's really very barbarian and that only the
sort of oh yeah the um christianity or the or christian morality kind of got us where we are
nowadays and people often don't really want to think about that without this we'd still be
living in a time that is very similar to what you're describing in your book yeah it is um it
is like when you look at the legal and moral um like developments around human life it is very
much christianity that um that starts to make people feel differently about it um and it's
constantine who brings in the first law that says you can't just kill a slave for example yeah i'll
never forget when i was a an undergraduate one of my um my lecturers mary harlow talking about the
romans and like the terrible things that they did um and and then just saying and yet they called
other people barbarians right like they will do all this stuff they will crucify people in the
street they will have these monstrous things that they do to one another just as a matter of their
political course they will murder people in their houses on a distressingly regular basis and then
they're just getting cross about trousers like but trousers is the line that's the germanic barbarian
line look at them i mean what kind of people must they be i know they don't even you know murder
people in the arena yeah no it's uh it's fascinating as fascinating as your book is and i'm
just gonna say the name again it's called um a fatal thing happened on the way to the forum
it's a very good book what we talked about now was the first part of the first chapter so yeah
so yeah you get an idea of the the breadth of a material that you can find in this book i mean
you already know it so talking about my audience here um they will um thank you so much for joining
me again for an episode it's my pleasure when i write another one i'll come back so it's going
to be in about two years yeah probably good so march 2023 um i suppose we'll still be around then
i hope so great well thank you and um best of luck with you said your book just came out in the us
so um you're you're basically world famous with this book now as well not just with that's the
aim yeah perfect okay so uh thank you very much and um yeah let's um let's talk soon 2023 thank you